New values and types chapter (#516)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/values-and-types/lists.adoc

[[cypher-lists]]
= Lists

> Cypher includes comprehensive supports of lists. 

Reviewer: should this not still be: support for?

> This section first describes lists in general, and the discusses how to use list comprehension and pattern comprehension using lists. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section first describes lists in general, and then discusses how to use list comprehension and pattern comprehension in lists. 
```

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

A list can consist of different value types.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN [0, "hello", 3.14, '2015-06-24T12:50:35.556+01:00', null] AS list
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +list+

> | +[0, "hello", 3.14, "2015-06-24T12:50:35.556+01:00", null]+

Reviewer: The 4th item looks like you're trying to define a datetime, but is still a string, is that intended?

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

=== List range and size 

> The below examples uses the xref::functions/list.adoc#functions-range[`range`] function to create lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The below examples use the xref::functions/list.adoc#functions-range[`range`] function to create lists.
```

This function returns a list containing all numbers between given start and end numbers.
The range is inclusive in both ends.

To access individual elements in the list, use square brackets.

> This extracts from the start index and up to, but not including, the end index.

Reviewer: This sentence is strange, maybe just say lists are indexed by 0 in Cypher?

Reviewer: Also for demonstrating list index access, it might be easier to understand when the range value isn't being used. e.g 
WITH [5,1,7] AS list
RETURN list[2]

7

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN range(0, 10)[3] AS list
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +list+
| +3+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

It is also possible to use negative numbers, to start from the end of the list instead.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN range(0, 10)[-3] AS list
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +list+
| +8+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

> Finally, it is possible to use ranges inside the brackets to return ranges of the list.

Reviewer: shall we discuss the inclusivity of the range for this operator? e.g 0..3 returns the indexes 0, 1 and 2 but not 3

=== Example graph

The following graph is used for examples below:

image::values_and_types_lists_graph.svg[]

To recreate it, run the following query against an empty Neo4j database:

[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE
  (keanu:Person {name: 'Keanu Reeves'}),
  (johnnymnemonic:Movie {title: 'Johnny Mnemonic', released: 1995}),
  (thematrixrevolutions:Movie {title: 'The Matrix Revolutions', released: 2003}),
  (thematrixreloaded:Movie {title: 'The Matrix Reloaded', released: 2003}),
  (thereplacements:Movie {title: 'The Replacements', released: 2000}),
  (thematrix:Movie {title: 'The Matrix', released: 1999}),
  (thedevilsadvocate:Movie {title: 'The Devils Advocate', released: 1997}),
  (matrix4:Movie {title: 'The Matrix Resurrections', released: 2021}),
  (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->(johnnymnemonic),
  (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->(thematrixrevolutions),
  (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->(thematrixreloaded),
  (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->(thereplacements),
  (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->(thematrix),
  (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->(thedevilsadvocate),
  (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->(matrix4)
----

=== Examples

> This example returns a list that contains the year when the movies was released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example returns a list that contains the year when the movies were released.
```

> The pattern matching in the pattern comprehension looks for `Matrix` in the movie title and that the node `a` (`Person` node with the name `Keanu Reeves`) has a relationship with the movie.

Reviewer: There is no node names `a`

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (keanu:Person {name: 'Keanu Reeves'})
RETURN [(keanu)-->(b:Movie) WHERE b.title CONTAINS 'Matrix' | b.released] AS years
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +years+
| +[2021,2003,2003,1999]+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

The whole predicate, including the `WHERE` keyword, is optional and may be omitted.

This example returns a sorted list that contains years.

> The pattern matching in the pattern comprehension looks for movie nodes that has a relationship with the node `a` (`Person` node with the name `Keanu Reeves`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pattern matching in the pattern comprehension looks for movie nodes that have a relationship with the node `keanu ` (`Person` node with the name `Keanu Reeves`).
```

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (keanu:Person {name: 'Keanu Reeves'})

Reviewer: This feels like a strange use of it (well the pattern comprehension combined with the unwind and collect). Can we not just return the list unsorted? (for a sorted version I would recommend using COLLECT {} and not a pattern comprehension tbh

WITH [(keanu)-->(b:Movie) | b.released] AS years
UNWIND years AS year
WITH year ORDER BY year
RETURN COLLECT(year) AS sorted_years
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +sorted_years+
| +[1995,1997,1999,2000,2003,2003,2021]+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

=== Storing lists as properties 

It is possible to store homogenous lists of simple values as properties. 
For example, the following query creates a list from the `title` properties of the `Movie` nodes connected to `Keanu Reeves`. 

> It then sets that list as a `resume` property of `Keanu Reeves`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It then sets that list as a `resume` property on `Keanu Reeves`.
```

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (keanu:Person {name: 'Keanu Reeves'})
WITH keanu,[(keanu)-->(b:Movie) | b.title] AS movieTitles
SET keanu.resume = movieTitles

> Return keanu.resume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETURN keanu.resume
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +keanu.resume+
| +["The Matrix Resurrections", "The Devils Advocate", "The Matrix", "The Replacements", "The Matrix Reloaded", "The Matrix Revolutions", "Johnny Mnemonic"]+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

> It is not, however, possible to store heterogenous lists containing values of different data types as properties.

Reviewer: a heterogenous list is one containing different values, so this sentence reads a little bit like you're repeating yourself, it is helpful to define what a heterogenous list is though! so perhaps rewording this could be useful :)

Author: We define it in section about property types, so I think it's fine to just say "It is not, however, possible to store heterogenous lists as properties."

For example, the following query, which tries to set a list including both the `title` and the `released` properties as the `resume` property of `Keanu Reeves` will fail. 
This is because the `title` property values are stored as strings, while the `released` property values are stored as integers. 

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
MATCH (keanu:Person {name: 'Keanu Reeves'})
WITH keanu,[(keanu)-->(b:Movie) | b.title]  + [(keanu)-->(b:Movie) | b.released] AS movieTitles
SET keanu.resume = movieTitles

> Return keanu.resume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETURN keanu.resume
```
